Distributed Control Framework for Connectivity Preservation and
Collective Reconfiguration in Flow-Driven Robot Fleets
Prajjwal Dutta, Geoff Hollinger, and Xi Yu

Abstract— We study the deployment of underwater robot
fleets in large, flow dominated environments where localization
is denied, communication is limited, and energy is scarce. The
robots need to travel long distances, detect emerging targets,
and stay connected using only local information. To meet these
challenges we design a distributed framework that exploits
natural drift and activates control only when required. The
method begins with the robots deployed as a fully connected
network. Using minimal information exchange, each robot
prunes non-critical edges, producing a sparse and tree like
structure that spans the entire team. Upon this structure
we construct a distributed control Lyapunov function–control
barrier function (CLF–CBF) framework. Each robot enforces
barrier constraints to maintain the necessary connections, while
redundant links are discarded when alternative paths emerge.
When a target is discovered, this framework ensures the
detecting robot attends the target, while the team reconfigures
to provide a connected formation. This approach guarantees
long term connectivity with very low control effort, and enables
collective response to dynamic tasks. Simulations validates the
framework and demonstrates that it yields spanning structures
that converge toward a minimum spanning tree over time,
highlighting both its efficiency and robustness under realistic
underwater conditions.

I. I NTRODUCTION
We are interested in deploying a fleet of underwater robots
into large-scale, challenging environments such as the deep
ocean and under-ice cavities, where localization is denied,
communication bandwidth is limited, and the environment is
dominated by dynamic flows and eddies [1].These robots
must traverse long distances on limited energy budgets,
discover emerging regions of interest, sample the environment, and relay data, all while relying on intermittent and
bandwidth-limited communication [2], [3].
The central challenge is to design strategies that enable the
fleet to (i) expend minimal control effort while traveling long
distances and completing complex tasks, (ii) efficiently cover
a large spatial domain to discover emerging targets while
maintaining network connectivity, and (iii) realize a globally
connected configuration using only localized information and
limited communication.
Our proposed approach is to deploy the robots together and
then allow them to drift with the prevailing flow as much as
possible. Control effort is only applied when it is necessary.
This work was supported by the NSF Awards 2322055 and 2529791.
P. Dutta and X. Yu is with the School of Manufacturing Systems and
Networks at Arizona State University (e-mail: {pdutta9, xyu}@asu.edu).
G. Holinger is with the Department of Mechanical, Industrial, and
Manufacturing Engineering at Oregon State University (e-mail: Geoff.Hollinger@oregonstate.edu).

This includes situations when the robots risk drifting outside
a prescribed region or when they risk losing connectivity. In
this way the formation disperses while staying connected,
and the group can also reconfigure when a new target
location is discovered or generated [4]. This strategy is bold,
but it is supported by recent progress. Previous work has
shown that surface vehicles can drift with the flow while
using minimal control to remain in gyre like structures [5],
or track the periodicity of revisits via intermittent control
triggered by prescribed conditions [6]. In addition, broadly
adopted models describe the uncontrolled motion of objects
in water as drift combined with Brownian type diffusion
[7]–[9], which align with observation on underwater robots
[10], [11]. This indicates that our fleet will approximately
follow the main direction of the flow while also dispersing
stochastically.
Although dispersion promotes coverage of large task
spaces, two challenges remain open. The first is how to
maintain connectivity. The second is how to enable reconfiguration around targets while working with strict energy
budgets and unreliable communication that cannot support
centralized control. Prior work on connectivity maintenance
and target surrounding has emphasized the importance of
graph theoretic methods [12], [13]. Control barrier functions
(CBFs) have received attention for their energy efficiency
in this setting. For example, CBFs have been applied to
the Fiedler value of the network graph in order to maintain
connectivity [14]. This approach is effective but it requires
centralized and computationally expensive eigenvalue calculations. Other work has applied distributed CBF formulations
that keep robots pairwise within communication range [15],
[16]. More recently, a hybrid framework was introduced that
combines distributed CBFs with a graph theoretic tool, where
each robot interacts only with a limited set of neighbors
defined by a minimum spanning tree (MST) [17]. This
solution is promising since each robot only applies CBF to
itself and to selected neighbors, but it still requires generating
a minimum spanning tree that depends on global information.
In our case a feasible framework must combine two
ingredients. The first is a distributed neighbor selection
strategy so that each robot chooses a limited set of neighbors
to remain within communication range. The second is a
local control law applied only to these neighbors. Together
these two features must guarantee global connectivity while
minimizing control effort. Work on spanning trees has shown
that distributed verification methods exist, but the actual
construction of a minimum spanning tree is classically cen-

tralized [18]–[20]. Progress in fully distributed protocol for
exact MST construction [21], [22] remain communicationintensive. As a result, several approximate or near-optimal
distributed methods have been proposed, but they do not
achieve exact solutions [23].
We take advantage of two physical features of our problem. First, the robots are deployed together, and the initial
configuration forms a fully connected graph. Second, the purpose of a spanning tree is to reduce long range connections.
A robot should drop links to distant neighbors whenever a
closer neighbor can maintain connectivity at lower control
cost. Recent progress [24] has also shown that robots can
verify whether an edge is critical, meaning that breaking
it would break the network connectivity, using distributed
procedures that rely only on very limited data sharing. Based
on these observations we propose a distributed method that
requires very little information exchange. Each robot shares
only a list of its neighbor indices. With this limited data
the robots identify and prune edges that are not critical to
connectivity. The result is a sparse and tree-like structure that
spans the entire network. Once this structure is established,
we construct a distributed control Lyapunov function–control
barrier function (CLF–CBF) framework upon it. Each robot
maintains only the necessary connections by enforcing CBF
constraints, and redundant links are pruned whenever new
edges provide alternative paths. When a target is detected, the
framework drives the robot that discovers it toward the target,
while the rest of the team reconfigures to form a supporting
network from the bottom up. As a result, the team preserves
connectivity, expands to maintain coverage, and collectively
shifts toward the target location.
Simulations demonstrate that this method can efficiently
attend to emerging targets in different regions of the environment while keeping the network connected. Over deployment
time the spanning structure produced by this distributed
pruning strategy converges toward a minimum spanning tree.
This shows both its long term efficiency and its robustness
in flow dominated and resource constrained conditions.
This paper is organized as follows. Sec. II introduces the
problem. Sec. III presents our two-fold control framework.
Sec. IV demonstrates the results of the proposed method via
simulated examples. Sec. V concluded this work.

where fflow is the background velocity field. Each individual
object then deviates from x̄(t) due to unresolved smallscale turbulence and fluctuations, which can be modeled as
Brownian motion:

II. BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
A. Advection-diffusion model [7]–[9]
Considering a group of N objects released together in
the water, their collective motion can be decomposed into a
drift component and a stochastic dispersion component. Let
xi (t) ∈ Rn denote the position of the i-th object at time t,
where i ∈ {1, 2, ..., N }, and let

and a minimum pairwise separation distance dmin > 0 must
be maintained to avoid collisions.
The communication network is described by the standard
disk model with nominal range Rmax > 0. At time t,
an undirected edge (i, j) exists between robots i and j if
∥xi (t)−xj (t)∥ ≤ Rmax . The resulting network is represented
by the undirected graph Gt = (V, Et ), where the vertex set V
corresponds to robots and the edge set Et encodes pairwise
communication links. The neighborhood of robot i is defined
as
N (i) = {j ∈ V : ∥xi (t) − xj (t)∥ ≤ Rmax },

N

x̄(t) =

1 X
xi (t)
N i=1

be the center of mass of the group. The evolution of the
center of mass is governed primarily by the advective flow
field, i.e.,
˙
x̄(t)
≈ fflow (x̄(t), t),

dxi (t) = fflow (x̄(t), t)dt + dWi (t),
where Wi (t) is a Wiener process. Thus the group drifts
together with the flow through the motion of x̄(t), while
individuals spread stochastically around the drifting center
due to the independent diffusion terms.
As an example, in the simulation platform where n =
2, we adopt an advection field consisting of a uniform
background current superimposed with a set of Q vortices:


Q
X
−(x2 − x2,q )
fflow (x, t) = vbg (t) +
κq
,
(x1 − x1,q )
q=1

with vortex centers (x1,q , x2,q ) and strengths κq , q =
1, 2, ..., Q. Drag applied on robot i is Fdrag (ẋi ) = −γ ẋi ,
γ > 0. A simulation-accurate model is
dxi (t) = ui (t)dt + fflow (x̄(t), t)dt + Fdrag (ẋi )dt + dWi (t),
where ui is the control. For control synthesis, we absorb drag
and stochastic effects into a bounded disturbance di to retain
control-affine form:
ẋi (t) = fflow (x̄(t), t) + ui (t) + di (t),

¯
∥di ∥ ≤ d.

(1)

With the control input ui (t) set to zero throughout the
deployment time window, the robots will be passively advected by the background flow while gradually dispersing
due to stochastic perturbations.
Notice that the choice of a two-dimensional environment
is made solely for ease of visualization. The developed
method is dimension-agnostic and extends directly to threedimensional settings.
B. Assumptions on communication and connectivity
We model these N robots indexed by i ∈ V = {1, . . . , N },
each with planar position xi ∈ R2 and bounded control input
ui ∈ R2 , with ∥ui ∥ ≤ umax . Robots follow single-integrator
dynamics
ẋi = ui ,

so that agent i observes relative states and exchanges messages only with robots in N (i). We denote the degree of
node i as deg(i) = |N (i)|. The set of common neighbors of

two nodes i, j is N (i) ∩ N (j), and the two-hop neighbors
of i are N (2) (i) = {k ∈ V : ∃j ∈ N (i) with k ∈ N (j)}.
The initial communication graph G0 = (V, E0 ) is assumed
to be connected. Connectivity is defined in the standard
graph-theoretic sense: the graph Gt is connected if, for every
pair i, j ∈ V, there exists a path in Et linking them. No
global positions, centralized maps, or spectral information
are assumed to be available.
C. Problem Statement
Consider the robots and communication network introduced in the previous section. The robots are advected by the
background flow field fflow and subject to stochastic perturbations that induce dispersion (as introduce in eq. (1)). This
natural dispersion promotes exploration but risks breaking
connectivity. Locations of interest are not known a priori and
are only detected when an agent enters its sensing footprint.
During exploration phases (when no target is detected),
the team drifts with fflow while maintaining connectivity
and sparsifying the communication graph. When a target
is detected, a local subset of agents initiates goal-seeking
behavior while the remaining agents act as relays to preserve
end-to-end connectivity across the fleet.
Each agent i has access to: (i) its own state xi ; (ii) relative
states {xj − xi }j∈N (i) and messages received from neighbors; and (iii) local graph quantities that can be computed
through neighbor exchanges, such as two-hop information.
No centralized computation, global identifiers beyond local
exchanges, globally shared maps, spanning trees, or spectral
quantities (e.g., eigenvalues) are assumed.
The problem is therefore to design a distributed control
framework that satisfies the following objectives:
1) Connectivity preservation: ensure that the communication graph Gt remains connected for all t.
2) Energy efficiency: leverage flow advection and activate inputs only when necessary.
3) Collective reconfiguration: enable the team to spread
out for coverage during exploration and shift toward
newly discovered targets, while maintaining connectivity and collision avoidance.
The solution must rely exclusively on local relative information and distributed exchanges, without requiring any
centralized solver or globally shared information.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
Our method has two components. First, we identify a
sparse critical communication structure by pruning nonessential edges. Then, we apply a distributed CLF-CBF
framework on this structure to preserve connectivity and
enable target-driven reconfiguration. Each component is detailed in the following subsections.
A. Distributed Identification of a critical graph structure
We first identify the set of edges that are critical, meaning
that removing them would disconnect the network. Following
the neighbor-only procedure in [24], each robot exchanges
simple messages with its neighbors until it can determine

whether a link provides the only route to part of the network.
If so, the link is marked as critical and must never be
removed. This produces the set C ⊆ E of edges that guarantee
global connectivity.
Once C is identified, our method sparsifies the network
by systematically pruning among the remaining edges E − =
E \ C. This pruning is guided by three key principles: 1)
prioritize short alternatives, 2) ensure local safety, and 3)
maintain global robustness.
Distance-first pruning: Let lij = ∥xi − xj ∥ denote the
length of edge (i, j) ∈ E − . We say that a shorter alternative
between i and j exists if there is a path i ⇝ j of at most H
hops (default H = 2) such that
max
(p,q)∈i⇝j

lpq < lij .

This condition ensures that if the long edge (i, j) is removed,
i and j are still connected through a strictly shorter route.
Pruning guards: An edge (i, j) ∈ E − is eligible for removal
only if all the following conditions hold:
1) Alternative check: A shorter alternative i ⇝ j exists.
2) Degree guard: Neither endpoint becomes isolated, i.e.,
min{deg(i), deg(j)} ≥ 2.
3) Next-step guard: All edges on the alternative path
satisfy lpq ≤ Rmax − ε, for some margin ε > 0,
reducing the risk that small drift immediately breaks
the substitute path.
4) Critical guard: (i, j) ∈
/ C.
Only when all four checks pass is (i, j) removed.
Conflict-free batching: To avoid transient disconnection
from simultaneous deletions, pruning is executed in batches.
A batch Ebatch ⊆ E − is constructed such that no two edges in
Ebatch share a vertex. All edges in the batch are then pruned
atomically:
E ← E \ Ebatch .
A three-step process of pruning towards a critical structure
is summarized as in Algorithm 1. Besides it, one can add
the following optional operation for a more robust result.
Optional robustness via triangle-cycle preservation: In
practice, communication can be intermittent, so we retain
redundancy by preserving short local 3-cycles whenever
possible. For edge (i, j), define the common-neighbor count
T (i, j) = |N (i) ∩ N (j)|,
and the normalized density score
R(i, j) =

T (i, j)
.
min{deg(i), deg(j)}

A combined robustness score is then
P (i, j) = R(i, j) (1 + T (i, j)),

Pbil (i, j) = 21 (Pi + Pj ).

When two edges have comparable length, the pruning rule
keeps the one with the higher Pbil , preserving denser triangles
that act as two-hop backups.
Numerical Example (see Fig. 1): Here we give a simple
example to illustrate the process. The original graph has five

Algorithm 1 Distributed Distance-First Pruning with Recouping and Local Rewiring
1: Input: Graph G = (V, E), neighbor sets N (i), critical
edges C from Sec. III-A
2: Output: Reduced/updated edge set E ′
3: E ′ ← E;
E − ← E ′ \ C {Only non-critical edges can
be pruned}
4: Each endpoint of (i, j) ∈ E − measures lij = ∥xi − xj ∥
and exchanges lij
5: Rank edges in E − by descending lij ; within a small
length tolerance, use Pbil as an optional robustness tiebreaker (higher Pbil is more valuable to keep)
6: Build a vertex-disjoint batch Ebatch from the ranked list
7: for each (i, j) ∈ Ebatch do
8:
Check alternative path i → · · · → j within H hops
whose maximum edge length < lij
9:
Degree guard: min{degE ′ (i), degE ′ (j)} ≥ 2
10:
Next-step guard: all edges on the alternative path
Fig. 1. Edge Priority–Based Graph Modification on a 5-Node Network:
satisfy l ≤ Rmax − ε
(a) Original graph with priorities; (b) after batch pruning of edges (3, 4)
11:
if all guards satisfied then
and (4, 5); (c) after adding candidate edge (2, 5), annotated with its score
Sadd = 0.767.
12:
E ′ ← E ′ \ {(i, j)} {Prune}
13:
end if
Resulting structure: This three-step process yields a sparse,
14: end for
tree-like backbone G ′ = (V, E ′ ). Unlike a global MST,
15: Recoup: If any node’s degree becomes 0, restore its most
which requires centralized knowledge of all edge lengths,
recently removed incident edge
this backbone is constructed using only neighbor-to-neighbor
16: for each i ∈ V do
information. The benefits are: (i) reduced the edge count, (ii)
17:
for each k ∈ N (2) (i) with (i, k) ∈
/ E ′ do
−∥xi −xk ∥
fewer barrier function constraints per robot in the next stage,
;
{2-hop candidates} Sdistance = RmaxR
max
|CN (i,k)|
1
reducing computation and control effort, and (iii) robustness
Sconnectivity = 1 +
;
S
=
efficiency
2
dG′ (i,k)
to drift via short alternative paths and triangle backups.
Sadd (i, k) = αSdistance + βSconnectivity + γSefficiency
19:20:
end for
B. Decentralized CLF-CBF Control on the Evolving Tree 18:
21:
Propose addition (i, k ⋆ ) with maximal Sadd that pre′
′
Once pruning yields the sparse backbone G = (V, E ),
serves connectivity and reduces local max incident
each robot i maintains two neighbor sets: the critical neighlength
′
bors Ci = {j : (i, j) ∈ E }, which belong to the pruned
22:
if proposal accepted by endpoints then
structure and must be preserved for connectivity, and the
23:
E ′ ← E ′ ∪ {(i, k ⋆ )} {Local rewiring}
sensing neighbors N (i) = {j : ∥xi − xj ∥ ≤ Rmax }, which
24:
end if
are considered for collision safety.
25: end for
For every j ∈ N (i), a safety barrier candidate
26: return E ′
2
2
hsafe
=
∥x
−
x
∥
−
d
i
j
ij
min

nodes and six edges, including cycles (2, 3, 4) and (3, 4, 5).
Using the method of [24], the tail (1, 2) is marked critical
while the cycle edges are non-critical.
After Step 1: edge (3, 4) is removed because the path 3 →
5 → 4 is shorter and all guards hold.
After Step 2: edge (4, 5) is removed because the path 4 →
3 → 2 → 5 is available and safe. The graph is reduced to
four edges, remains connected, and is tree-like.
Optionally, edge (2, 5) can be added as a two-hop shortcut
to improve robustness while keeping the structure sparse.

enforces collision avoidance via establishing the inequality,
and for every j ∈ Ci , a connectivity barrier candidate
2
hconn
= Rmax
− ∥xi − xj ∥2
ij

works in parallel with the safety barrier candidate to ensure
that critical links remain within range. These constraints are
standard in multi-robot control and are implemented in real
time as introduced in [17], [25].
The Lyapunov function is defined over the candidate
2
Vi (xi ) = ∥xi − xref
i ∥ ,

where the reference xref
depends on whether a target is
i
detected. If no target is detected, xref
= xi and Vi ≡ 0,
i
therefore the inequality upon this candidate is vacuous. If a
goal
target is assigned, xref
, and the inequality drives xi
i = xi
toward the target.

Scenario 1: Exploration (no target). All robots drift under the background flow fflow . Only the CBFs are active:
safety barriers prevent collisions with sensing neighbors, and
connectivity barriers preserve links with critical neighbors.
Since Vi ≡ 0 and the inequality established by default,
no additional control action is applied, the fleet explores
passively while maneuver itself only when the sparse links
in the pruned critical structure is at risk.
Scenario 2: Target engagement. When a robot detects a
goal
target, Vi turns to a positivie value with xref
. Solving
i = xi
control inputs satisfying the inequality to bring down Vi
drives this detecting robot toward the goal. The same set
of connectivity barriers now drives the rest robots to stay
in range with their critical neighbors, yielding a connected
structure being ‘dragged’ by the detecting robot towards the

Algorithm 2 End-to-End Decentralized Control Framework
(per timestep)
1: Neighbor exchange; update Ni and run distributed
critical-edge detection [24]
2: Distance-first pruning on E \ C with guards and batching; optional triangle tie-breaker; recoup/rewire locally
(Alg. 1)
3: Set Ti ← {j : (i, j) ∈ E ′ } from current pruned graph
4: if agent i has a target in range then
5:
Activate CLF toward xgoal
i ; solve CLF-CBF constrained control problem with safety CBFs for Ni and
connectivity CBFs for Ti
6: else
7:
Solve CBF-only problem (safety on Ni , connectivity
on Ti ); drift under flow otherwise
8: end if
9: Apply ui ; broadcast updated state to neighbors

emerging target.
The overall control framework is summarized as in Alg. 2.
IV. S IMULATION S ETUP AND R ESULTS
In this section we present several simulated examples
to dmonstrate the results of the proposed framework. In
each run, N robots (fixed N = 12 or randomized N ∈
[3, 20]) operate in a 10 × 10 m2 workspace with discretetime integration (∆t = 0.1 s). Robots have randomized
hydrodynamic parameters: mass m ≈ 2.0 ± 0.2 kg, volume
V = m/1800 m3 , drag coefficient Cd ≈ 0.8 ± 0.1, and
frontal area A ≈ 0.01 ± 0.002 m2 . Speeds are capped at
2.0 m/s. Communication uses a nominal range Rmax = 1.2
m, attenuated by spreading loss (20 log10 r), absorption (0.1
dB/m), and depth-layer factors, with a guaranteed minimum
of 0.3Rmax . A safety distance dmin = 0.6 m is enforced.
Target engagement is handled through a decentralized
CLF-CBF quadratic program (QP) with parameters α =
1.5, β = 5.0, βs = 10.0, input bound ∥u∥ ≤ 0.40, and
cost ∥u∥2 + 50γ 2 . The QP is solved online via CVXPY
(SciPy fallback). Exploring robots apply a CBF-enhanced
force-based controller with repulsive safety and connectivity
terms.
The environment combines a rotating base current V(t)
(initialized at [0.2, 0.1] m/s), two Gaussian vortices at (3, 7)
and (7, 3) with strengths +1.5 and −1.2 and radii 2.0, 1.8,
and sinusoidal turbulence of intensity 0.05. Hydrodynamic
drag is modeled with buoyancy and advection forces included
for realism.
Figure 2 provides a direct comparison between the uncontrolled and controlled cases. In both panels, the same set
of robots experiences identical environmental dynamics and
parameters. In the uncontrolled case (Fig. 2a), robots drift
apart, their communication links vanish, and the network
fragments into several disconnected clusters. In contrast, with
our decentralized control framework (Fig. 2b), connectivity
is preserved throughout the drift and the team remains
coordinated while progressing toward the goal.

(a) Brownian motion: edges
vanish, network disconnects.

(b) Proposed method:
connectivity preserved.

Fig. 2.
Comparison between uncontrolled drift and our decentralized
framework. In the uncontrolled case, robots diffuse apart and the network
fragments, whereas our method preserves connectivity and still reaches the
goal within a comparable time.

It is generally expected that in the absence of globally
shared information, and under continuously changing environments, distributed methods will lose some optimality
compared to centralized solutions. To evaluate this tradeoff,
we conducted a simulation in which our distributed pruning
method (Sec. III.A, without the optional robustness enhancements) was run in parallel with a centralized minimum spanning tree (MST) identification. The resulting connectivity
graphs were compared over time.
Figure 3 shows that by the end of the mission the
distributed strategy produces a graph with only 11 active
edges for 12 robots, matching the edge count of the MST.
This outcome is quantified in Fig. 4, which plots the total
edge length of the distributed method against the centralized
MST. The green curve (proposed framework) closely tracks
the blue curve (centralized MST), and the red curve (the
difference between the two) steadily decreases to zero as the
robots disperse. The small bumps on the red curve correspond to times when new targets are detected and the team
reconfigures, temporarily disturbing the topology. Despite
these events, the distributed strategy consistently tracks the
MST and converges to the same total cost, demonstrating the
efficiency of local pruning decisions in the long run.
While the previous analysis compared only the graph
structures generated by our decentralized framework and
a centralized MST, Figure 5 evaluates the full closed-loop
performance when each structure is used as the backbone
of a CLF–CBF controller. In this setting, the MST-based
CLF–CBF serves as a close approximation of the approach
in [17], whereas our framework applies the controller on
top of a distributedly generated critical structure. The sideby-side results show that both strategies successfully guide
the robots to the goal while preserving connectivity, with our
method achieving performance comparable to the centralized
baseline despite despite foregoing centralized spanning graph
construction.
See full video1 for all simulated examples presented in
this section.
1 https://youtu.be/FbIUaF_sbOM

the underlying connectivity structure to the requirements
of specific missions, we aim to extend the flexibility and
applicability of the proposed framework.

Fig. 3. 12-robot in the target engagement scenario. The decentralized
framework achieves 11 critical edges (solid lines) in the final state, preserving connectivity while minimizing total distance.

Fig. 4.
The decentralized framework prunes edges and produces the
preserved critical structure (green) closely matches the MST (blue) in total
edge lengths. Over time when robots disperse, the error metric (red) falls
to zero, confirming that local pruning recovers an MST-equivalent structure
in the long run.

V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We presented a distributed framework for underwater robot
fleets operating in flow-dominated environments where localization, communication, and energy resources are limited.
Our approach combines: (i) distributed identification of a
sparse critical structure, and (ii) decentralized CLF-CBF
control layered on this structure to maintain safety and
connectivity during drift and to reconfigure reliably when
targets emerge. Through this design, robots exploit natural
flow for energy-efficient exploration while preserving endto-end connectivity and responding adaptively to new goals.
The results demonstrate that connectivity can be maintained without global knowledge on robot locations, and that
the fleet remains robust to emerging targets and environmental disturbances.
Future work will first focus on incorporating realistic underwater vehicle dynamics into the framework and validating
the approach with physical robot experiments. Beyond this
natural extension, we will explore distributed methods for
synthesizing alternative network topologies tailored to different tasks, such as cooperative localization, rendezvous of
robots, and persistent environmental monitoring. By adapting

(a) Centralized Critical
Structure

(b) Decentralized Critical
Structure

(c) Robot–Target Distances
under the Centralized
Controller

(d) Robot–Target Distances
under the Decentralized
Controller

Fig. 5.
Comparison of centralized and decentralized critical structure
identification in a 12-robot target engagement scenario under identical
underwater settings. (a) Final state robot network with centralized identified
MST. (b) Final state robot network with decentralized identified critical
structure. (c) Average and minimum robot–target distances under the centralized controller. (d) Average and minimum robot–target distances under
the decentralized controller. Both methods preserve connectivity and drive
the team to the goal with comparable performance.

R EFERENCES
[1] A. Muto, S. Athar, N. Butler, J. Garwood, C. Gibson, G. Hollinger,
P. Lundrigan, J. Montierth, N. Rypkema, B. Schiel et al., “Meshed
observations of the remote subsurface with heterogeneous intelligent
platforms (mothership): development of mothership-and-passenger
sampling system for ice-sheet grounding-zone observations: Early
results,” in AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, vol. 2024, no. 466, 2024,
pp. C33D–0466.
[2] B. Schiel, J. Montierth, E. Blattner, C. E. Dobbs, T. B. Nielsen, and
P. Lundrigan, “Using orthogonal chirps underwater for in-band, fullduplex communication with minimal self-interference cancellation,”
in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Underwater
Networks & Systems, 2024, pp. 1–8.
[3] B. Schiel and P. Lundrigan, “Role-based network addressing for
fleets of autonomous underwater vehicles,” in Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Underwater Networks & Systems, 2024,
pp. 1–2.
[4] N. L. Butler and G. A. Hollinger, “Hybrid decentralization for multirobot orienteering with mothership-passenger systems,” in 2025 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
2025, pp. 6573–6579.
[5] C. Wei, H. G. Tanner, X. Yu, and M. A. Hsieh, “Low-range interaction
periodic rendezvous along lagrangian coherent structures,” in 2019
American control conference (ACC). IEEE, 2019, pp. 4012–4017.
[6] G. Knizhnik, P. Li, X. Yu, and M. A. Hsieh, “Flow-based control
of marine robots in gyre-like environments,” in 2022 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2022, pp.
3047–3053.

[7] G. I. Taylor, “Diffusion by continuous movements,” Proceedings of
the london mathematical society, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 196–212, 1922.
[8] A. Okubo, “Oceanic diffusion diagrams,” in Deep sea research and
oceanographic abstracts, vol. 18, no. 8. Elsevier, 1971, pp. 789–802.
[9] A. J. Majda and P. R. Kramer, “Simplified models for turbulent
diffusion: theory, numerical modelling, and physical phenomena,”
Physics reports, vol. 314, no. 4-5, pp. 237–574, 1999.
[10] F. Berlinger, M. Gauci, and R. Nagpal, “Implicit coordination for
3d underwater collective behaviors in a fish-inspired robot swarm,”
Science Robotics, vol. 6, no. 50, p. eabd8668, 2021.
[11] A. Quattrini Li, C. J. Carver, Q. Shao, X. Zhou, and S. Nelakuditi, “Communication for underwater robots: Recent trends,” Current
Robotics Reports, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 13–22, 2023.
[12] R. Olfati-Saber, J. A. Fax, and R. M. Murray, “Consensus and
cooperation in networked multi-agent systems,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 215–233, 2007.
[13] D. Di Martino, A. Germani, C. Manes, and P. Palumbo, “Design of
observers for systems with rational output function,” in Proceedings of
the 45th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2006, pp. 1641–
1646.
[14] B. Capelli and L. Sabattini, “Connectivity maintenance: Global and
optimized approach through control barrier functions,” in 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2020,
pp. 5590–5596.
[15] L. Sabattini, N. Chopra, and C. Secchi, “Decentralized connectivity
maintenance for cooperative control of mobile robotic systems,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 1411–
1423, 2013.
[16] B. Capelli, H. Fouad, G. Beltrame, and L. Sabattini, “Decentralized connectivity maintenance with time delays using control barrier
functions,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2021, pp. 1586–1592.
[17] Y. Yang, Y. Lyu, and W. Luo, “Minimally constrained multi-robot coordination with line-of-sight connectivity maintenance,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.04271, 2023.
[18] O. Borvka, “O jistém problému minimálnı́m,” 1926.
[19] J. B. Kruskal, “On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the
traveling salesman problem,” Proceedings of the American Mathematical society, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 48–50, 1956.
[20] R. C. Prim, “Shortest connection networks and some generalizations,”
The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1389–1401,
1957.
[21] R. G. Gallager, P. A. Humblet, and P. M. Spira, “A distributed
algorithm for minimum-weight spanning trees,” ACM Transactions on
Programming Languages and systems (TOPLAS), vol. 5, no. 1, pp.
66–77, 1983.
[22] B. Awerbuch, “Optimal distributed algorithms for minimum weight
spanning tree, counting, leader election, and related problems,” in
Proceedings of the nineteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
computing, 1987, pp. 230–240.
[23] M. Khan and G. Pandurangan, “A fast distributed approximation algorithm for minimum spanning trees,” Distributed Computing, vol. 20,
no. 6, pp. 391–402, 2008.
[24] D. B. Venkateswaran, Z. Qu, and A. Gusrialdi, “A distributed method
for detecting critical edges and increasing edge connectivity in undirected networks,” in 2024 IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and
Control (CDC), 2024, pp. 6951–6956.
[25] A. D. Ames, S. Coogan, M. Egerstedt, G. Notomista, K. Sreenath,
and P. Tabuada, “Control barrier functions: Theory and applications,”
in 2019 18th European Control Conference (ECC), 2019, pp. 3420–
3431.

